Date: 2003-02-04 18:22:20
Format: wphtml
Title: The end of Safari

<b>The end of Safari.</b>

<a href="http://safari.oreilly.com">Safari</a> is O'Reilly service that allows reading books on-line for a fixed monthly fee. I subscribed to Safari a few months 
ago. I didn't unsubscribe - my credit card expired, my attempts to update the 
information failed and I was kicked out (rightfully so). I could re-enable the 
account but that's too much work and I didn't find the service all that useful. 
Why? Let's start with what's good about the service: they have plenty of books 
(almost all O'Reilly's books and many from other publishers). If you read the 
books and rotate them on a monthly basis it's cheaper than buying (in theory you 
can read around 8 books per month for $15). So why did I stop? First, I wasn't 
reading the books so quickly. In a few months I skimmed one book, read half of 
some other book and started reading 2 other books. One reason for not reading 
more is that, despite having broadband connection, reading through the web is 
still painful (I'm more or less ok with the quality of&nbsp; text but the speed 
of navigation is painfully slow). Another reason is that O'Reilly books (and 
usually computer books in general) are reference books in nature. They belong on 
the shelf where I can reach for them when I need an answer to a question. 
Another reason is ever-present lack of time. Another disadvantage of Safari is 
that you basically pay for the right to read as long as you pay. When you buy a 
book it's yours. When your Safari service is terminated, everything is gone. All 
in all, this is not a service for me.<p>I do admire O'Reilly for launching this 
venture - they've taken risks and did the right things e.g. books are just HTML 
pages that you can view in your browser (and save to your hard-drive for offline 
access, although that is, for obvious reasons, against the service agreement). 
But a lot of value is trapped in not-good-enough technology. For example 
inability to access books off-line, slow navigation, slow searching are results 
of using HTML as presentation and HTTP as transport. At present those are 
probably the best choices but it doesn't mean one couldn't imagine a better 
technology (help system in Windows comes close as it solves the slow navigation 
and slow searching problems). Also, it would be nice if one could keep a book or 
two when he decides to terminate the service (the number should be proportional 
to the total amount one spent so far on the service).