Date: 2004-12-23 09:36:21
Format: wphtml
Title: Yahoo cancelling Yahoo! Finance

This must be new: I just logged in to Yahoo! Finance section and it has a big notice that they're closing it on February 2005. This notice wasn't there a week ago and I didn't see any news about it in the blogosphere.

That's quite sad news. Accessing data from my (major U.S.) bank or other financial institutions is awful (compared to what it could be). Usually I'm limited to whatever web interface a given institution offers and an average quality of that is low in many cases hoovering near "awful" (datek.com, now ameritrade.com, is a good example of infurating web interface that makes me click and click and click to get the basic information).

I failed to get Microsoft Money or Quicken get data from my bank (and believe me, I tried to the point of furious frustration with cryptic error messages).

Yahoo! Finance was the only thing that I managed to get working. It was able to get the data from my different finance institutions (although there were glitches and periods of non-working) and show them aggregated in a farily good way.

But the killer (if only rarely used) feature was ability to transfer money electrnically between accounts in 2 different banks (btw. in those days it boggles the mind that it's impossible to set this up directly from my bank and that it takes 3 days to settle an electronic transfer).

Now it's gone. But I just discovered that <a href="http://etrade.com">etrade.com</a> allows to transfer from/to other bank accounts. So I can use that as my money router. It'll be more difficult to use since with Yahoo! I could transfer money from account A to account B in one transaction while via etrade I'll have to transfer from A to etrade and from etrade to B.

As I said, banking, once on the cutting age of innovation, is in stone ages when it comes to being able to use computers and network effectively.

Three days to settle an electronic transfer! Do they have a step of manual verification that they outsource to prison inmates in China? Or is it because they didn't upgrade their systems from pdp-11 yet?

And where's the ability to access the info about my bank account on my mobile phone?